Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 29 (2011) 5 – 12 
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
International Conference on Education and Educational Psychology (ICEEPSY 2011) 
Supervising sign language interpreters students 
Cátia Marlene Silva Monteiro Santos * 
Unidade Local de Saúde de Matosinhos EPE, Rua Dr. Eduardo Torres s/n, 4460 – Matosinhos, Portugal 
 
Abstract 
The  challenge  for  the  supervisor  is  to  prepare  the  sign  language  interpreters  students  for  flexibility  and  adaptability  to 
demanding situations that will emerge in their life course. The concern about the quality of these students is the result of another 
concern felt that is the quality of their supervisors who assist the students in their teaching - learning process. 
Through a literature review, this paper aims to reflect on the supervisor’s profile of the sign language interpreters students and to 
understand how he/she can improve and develop the student’s knowledge and skills in sign language. 
 
© 2011 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Selection and/or peer-review under responsibility of  Dr. Zafer Bekirogullari of Cognitive – Counselling, 
Research & Conference Services C-crcs. 
Keywords: Supervisor; Supervisee; Sign language interpreter; Profile; Teaching-learnig process. 
Introduction  
The changes that have taken place at various levels in our society require constant adjustments. Thus, at the turn 
of the century, there are few professions that had as much projection and growth as the Portuguese sign language 
interpreters.  Therefore,  this   professional   is   still  a  rising  figure  in  the  Portuguese   society,  seeking  for  the 
consolidation of his/her status quo. In Portugal, studies are scarce, both in the Portuguese sign language interpreter 
in general and in their initial training or graduation. 
Cromack  (2004)  explains  that  "(…)  there  are  still  a  very  small  number  of  studies  in  the  disability  area, 
particularly in deafness. Faced with this situation, there is a need for greater commitment to this segment of society, 
both in terms of policy and in scientific terms” (p.70). 
On one hand, it is recognized by a lot of professionals that many interpreters do not have a good command of 
some of the issues that they have to interpret and this may create confusion in the broadcast content (Guarinello, 
Santana, Figueiredo & Massi, 2008), On the other hand, there is a considerable gap between thinking and acting, 
theory and practice, especially when it comes to evaluate students. School should not be seen as "(…) a battlefield 
where what counts is the classification, more than the know-how" (Perrenoud, 1999, p.120). 
Therefore the supervisor have qualifications, ethics, knowledge of deaf culture and performance in sign language, 
so he/she can break down barriers to communication and be successful in the teaching-learning process because the 
 
* Cátia Santos Tel.: +351938262744 
Email address: catisantos@iol.pt. 
© 2011 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Selection and/or peer-review under responsibility of Dr Zafer Bekirogullari.
1877-0428 © 2011 Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
Selection and/or peer-review under responsibility of Dr Zafer Bekirogullari.                                                                     
doi:10.1016/j.sbspro.2011.11.200 
Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
6                                               Cátia Marlene Silva Monteiro Santos / Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 29 (2011) 5 – 12 
main  target  of  the  process  is  the  student’s  transformation  in  several  dimensions  like  the  personal,  professional, 
intellectual  and  social  ones.  Thus,  school  programs  must  develop  a  significant  set  of  contents  which  enables  the 
student to be ready for the professional practice.  
This paper aims to reflect on the supervisor’s profile of the sign language interpreters students and to understand 
how  he/she  can  improve  and  develop  the  student’s  knowledge  and  skills  in  the  Portuguese  sign  language.  It  is 
essentially  based  on  a  literature  review,  conducted  in  May  2011  from  EBSCO  Host  scientific  database.  The 
following  descriptors  were  used  and  combined:  Portuguese  sign  language  interpreter,  sign  language  interpreter, 
Portuguese sign language, sign language, supervision, supervisor´s profile, supervisee and students.   
This  article  is  divided  into  three  parts:  the  first  one  is  an  approach  to  the  profession  of  the  sign  language 
interpreter; the second regards the supervisor´s profile, and finally, the third part concerns supervising sign language 
interpreters students. 
1. The Portuguese sign language interpreter as a professional and as a supervisor 
Nowadays, the situation of sign language interpreters in Portugal is different from a decade ago. Fernandes and 
Carvalho (2005) note that: "As deaf people and their representative associations were growing, also increased the 
number and the type of situations in which it was required the presence of Portuguese Sign language interpreter. 
This new situation required a greater capacity and preparation of these professionals" (p. 143). 
Nevertheless, there are many aspects of the deaf community that have to be perceived by the interpreter in sign 
language  otherwise  it  becomes  difficult  for  the  interpreter  to  communicate  effectively  and  efficiently.  But  the 
interpretation/translation  is  not  easy.  Garinello  et  al  (2008)  explain  that  "(...)  between  one  language  and  another 
there is someone who gives directions in a language and tries to be felt in another" (p.67). Thus, the interpreter’s 
functions in sign language when he/she interprets are characterized by a strategy of interpretation, identity, welfare, 
sympathy and cultural articulation for and by the deaf community. 
Reflecting on the intervention of the Portuguese sign language interpreter, the complexity of the role, size and 
deepness of his/her performance is easily understandable because this professional is also an interpreter of a culture 
- with all it involves: language, history, art, education, sports, and politics, among others. So, he/she cannot only be 
reduced to the act of interpretation/translation.  
Aware of this gap, the Portuguese sign language interpreter invests in the acquisition of technical and theoretical 
knowledge. Learning is a way to change himself/herself and it is a way to become available for transformation. 
Given the fact that this professional works in a dynamic environment, he/she needs to quickly adapt to a variety 
of scenarios. The combination of mental tension inherent in the act of interpreting, together with specific factors of 
the context may enhance the levels of stress of the sign language interpreter. Dean and Pollard (2001) conducted 
innumerous  researches  on  occupational  diseases  of  the  sign  language  interpreters  and  the  results  show  that  they 
work on tension in an environment that requires attention and concentration that proves to be unfavorable for them. 
In  this  sense,  university  is  the  main  scenario  where  the  phase  of  transition  to  professional  life  is  more 
experienced. As a training institution, it has increasingly taken responsibility in supporting the transition to working 
life and consequently to adulthood (Moreno, 2005; Silva, 2008). 
It  is  through  this  context  that  the  young  adult  develops  the  different  dimensions  that  constitute  him/her  by 
confronting other peers with different ideas, experiences, models and life roles, allowing a gradual integration in the 
professional context (Young & Friesen, 1990; Silva, 2008). 
So, the challenge facing the training of future Portuguese sign language interpreters is to prepare them for a high 
degree of adaptability to new situations that, in a professional way or another, will eventually emerge in the course 
of  their  life.  Thus,  the  concern  about  the  quality  of  the  students’  training  in  the  graduation  in  translation  and 
interpretation in Portuguese sign language results from another concern felt: the quality of the supervisors who work 
in  the  teaching-learning  process  of  the  future  professionals.  Valente  and  Viana  (2009)  mentioned  that    "(...)  the 
mission of the higher education is to train critical and reflective practitioners, able to live in a  world of constant 
transformation, capable of building new knowledge (…) and endowed with a deep sense of ethics and human"  (p. 
5). So the supervisor must be prepared for the role that he/she will play and have enough skills for a transforming 
teaching. 
Cátia Marlene Silva Monteiro Santos / Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 29 (2011) 5 – 12                                      7
Through  a  teaching-learning  process  of  excellence,  the  supervisor  and  the  supervisee  interact  for  a  common 
purpose  which  is  to  allow  and  facilitate  the  supervisee’s  appropriation  of  different  knowledge  and  skills,  so  that 
he/she can become a competent professional. 
Reaserch suggests that many supervisors often feel unprepared for the role and have lack of confidence in their 
ability  to support students (Andrews  &  Chilton 2000, Astonet al. 2000, Neary, 2000). In  Australia, for example, 
many supervisors reported a lack of preparation to carry out their role (Henderson et al, 2006, Levett-Jones et al, 
2006; Myall, Levett-Jones & Latlean, 2008). 
Evidence  suggests  that  several  factors,  such  as  the  relationship  supervisor-supervisee  or  the  supervisor’s 
knowledge, attitude, communicative and technical skills play an important role in the supervisee’s learning process 
(Wright, 1990; Baillie, 1993; Campbell et al, 1994; Andrewns & Chilton, 2000; Andrews & Roberts, 2003; Pellat, 
2006; Ali Pa, 2008). 
2.  The Supervisor’s profile 
Given  the  conjecture  in  today’s  world,  skills  are  seen  as  a  foundation  of  excellence  and  success.  Thus,  it  is 
pertinent  to  identify  those  that  contribute  for  the  supervisors  of  the  Sign  language  interpreters  students  to  be 
successful "(...) in their overall performance, which in turn will develop the skills of the student" (Jardim, 2007, p. 
6). 
Pondering this issue leads us to affirm, like Jardim (2007) that the mission of higher education is the students’ 
global development with the aim to expand their capabilities as well as to increase their relationship skills with peers 
and others in order to train interested and competent professionals. 
Students  develop  their  skills  especially  in  the  interaction  that  takes  place  in  the  practice  context  which  offers 
various and specific challenges. In fact, the supervisor is an educational resource for the opportunities he/she offers, 
the guidelines that he/she makes, the model of practice that he/she performs and the model of practice that he/she 
allows  the  supervisee  to  be.  Therefore,  he/she  should  have  skills  that  are  considered  essential  to  promote  the 
development of the supervisee. 
Supported by Jardim (2007) three levels of skills are distinguished: basic, technical and transversal. According to 
this author, the basic skills refer to those that were acquired during childhood and early adolescence, such as reading 
and writing; performing simple mathematical operations; developing elementary notions of ethics and interpersonal 
relationships. The technical skills report to the profession and are usually acquired in the training context and when 
carrying out a working activity. Finally, the transversal skills, as the name implies, are those that are common in 
various  activities  performed  by  the  individual,  either  personally  or  professionally  or  even  socially.  They  are 
primarily acquired through contact with others and the performance of different functions. 
According to many authors, professionals in different areas should have several skills. The most common ones 
are  being  an  adviser,  a  friend,  an  expert  ,  a  good  communicator,  a  guide;  having  a  good  sense  of  humor;  being 
committed to the students; promoting mutual respect and being self confident, enthusiastic, approachable, generous, 
organized, patient and supportive (Darling, 1986; Philips e tal, 1996b; Spouse, 1996; Pollard & Trigs, 1997; Gray & 
Smith,  2000;  Morton  Cooper  &  Palmer,  2000;Vance,  2000;  Ordem  dos  Enfermeiros,  2003;  Fernandez,  Sanz, 
Santalla  &  Sanches,  2005;  Gallinagh  e  tal,  2005;  Marshal  &  Gordon,  2005;  Morse,  2006;  Jardim,  2007;  Yonge, 
Billay,  Myrirck  &  Luhanga,  2007;  Ali  Pa,  2008;  Jardim  &  Pereira,  2008;  Myall,  Levett-Jones  &  Latlean,  2008; 
Lennox, Skinner & Foureur, 2008; Hodges, 2009). 
It is important to note that the Portuguese sign language interpreters act in very specific environment. Therefore, 
from "(...) a set of skills, they mobilize those that are necessary for the performance of its business in a particular 
context" (Nunes, 2007, p. 11). Thus, the supervisor of the Portuguese Sign language  interpreters students  should 
have the skills mentioned above. However, supported by the literature on the supervisors’ skills in other areas, some 
skills should be added to the supervisor of the Portuguese sign language interpreters students: 
a)    Accountability  -  The  supervisor  recognizes  his/her  role  and  what  are  its  limits;  takes  responsibility  for 
his/her actions; knows what his/her role and responsibility are in accordance with the context where he/she works; 
consults experts in areas in  which he/she has difficulty or lack of knowledge; consults other professionals and/or 
organizations/institutions when the supervisee’s needs are beyond his/her area of influence or exercise (Ordem dos 
Enfermeiros Portugueses, 2003); 
8                                               Cátia Marlene Silva Monteiro Santos / Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 29 (2011) 5 – 12 
b)   Assertiveness  - "It's a way of communicating behaviorally, which means to say what each one feels and 
thinks, while giving statement space to the other " (Jardim & Pereira, 2006, p.108). Through a direct communication 
the individual does assert his/her rights without denying the others’ rights;  
c)    Voluntarism  -  supervision  should  be  characterized  by  a  voluntary  long  term  commitment  relationship 
between  supervisor  and  supervisee,  supporting  this  last  one  through  a  professional  transition  and  by  maintaining 
mutual and negotiated consent (Lennox, et al 2008); 
d)   Ability  to  identify  needs  and  the  supervisee’s  potential  -  The  supervisor  teaches  in  order  to  be  able  to 
promote learning in the supervisee; he/she sets goals, work objectives, contents and appropriate methodologies; the 
supervisor makes effective use of the available information on the supervisee’s progress; he/she critically evaluates 
his/her teaching and students and gives feedback in this process so that everyone can move towards the acquisition 
of as many skills as necessary for the profession. (Pollard & Trigs, 1997, Nunes, 2007); 
e)    Ability to reduce levels of stress, constantly  updated, to teach skills and to be sociable  - The supervisor 
exists  to  aid  in  the  teaching,  communication  and  sharing  of  the  practical  realities  of  being  a  sign  language 
interpreter. This role is increasingly important because students learn mostly theory and spend less time in hands-on 
training in the activities. The supervisor’s role serves the Sign language interpreter’s profession greatly by his/her 
ability to ease the transition of student to professional in a safe, efficient and personal manner. (Yonge, et al 2007); 
f)    Good memory, expert/member of the deaf culture, and performance with the Portuguese Sign language and 
the Portuguese language. 
g)    Among so many others.  
3. Students’ supervision in the graduation in translation/interpretation in Portuguese sign language 
Apart from the scientific knowledge, everything is taken into account (intuitions, emotions, experiences, beliefs, 
desires, hopes and fears) in the training of a profession (Perrenoud, 1993). 
The  collaboration  between  supervisor  and  supervisee  is  a  slow  and  progressive  path  that  requires  courage, 
commitment and dedication of both parts, because, as stated by Madureira and Leite (2003), it is a relationship that 
"(...) implies the questioning of beliefs, values, knowledge and personal skills and professional" (p.129). 
The supervisor is an important example for the supervisee since it is from him/her that the supervisee seeks to 
identify himself/herself for knowledge, skills and attitudes. The supervisor must be fully aware of his/her role, he 
must know the content to be worked, and he should know the meaning of the proposed. 
Most authors agree that  not everyone can be a supervisor. Good supervisors  usually exhibit caring  for others; 
they are inspirational, active and have a positive attitude toward making a difference in people’s lives (Kunich & 
Lester, 1999; Morse, 2006). 
According to Fernandéz, et al (2005), these are the three main qualities in the supervision process: authenticity, 
friendliness and respect. 
It  should  be  noted  that  supervisor  and  supervisee  must  be  present  in  the  supervision  process.  It  constitutes  a 
teaching resource for the students’ professional training, because it involves intellectual and relationship skills as 
well as different performance techniques. 
Thus,  the  practice  context  is  really  essential  in  the  students’  training,  especially  to  the  initiation  into  the 
professional practice. The supervisor’s impact on the teaching-learning process is extraordinary for the supervisee; 
both by the conditions, opportunities and guidance promoted by the supervisor, and by the model of professional 
practice that he/she is and offers the supervisee to be. However, some supervisors act not only based on knowledge 
gained in their academic training which is not qualified in some cases, but also on knowledge acquired during the 
professional practice, which makes them unprepared for supervision (Santos & Brandão, 2008). 
Currently,  the  interpreter  profession  requires  from  the  professionals  that  they  reinvent  themselves  every  day 
through  new  strategies,  experiences  and  knowledge  to  answer  the  different  questions  that  always  appear.  To 
encourage a meaningful learning of the supervisee, it is important to know what cognitive, attitudinal, performative 
elements are necessary in the supervision process. 
To be able to carry out his/her pedagogical role, the supervisor must consider the knowledge and communication 
with  the  supervisee  is  as  essential  aspect  since  he/she  is  responsible  for  the  supervisee’s  educational  process 
(Fernández, et al, 2005). 
Cátia Marlene Silva Monteiro Santos / Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 29 (2011) 5 – 12                                      9
A sine qua non condition is necessary to successfully complete the supervisory function which is to know and 
communicate with all students who are subject of supervision. The interpreters, who perform supervisory activities, 
need to have a better knowledge of their supervisees. They have to consider several factors such as: the evolutionary 
period of the student; the fact that students’ activity develops in relation to the educational institution; the fact that 
the student has a prior personal and family history; the fact that he/she falls into a class with a group of colleagues, 
and finally that he/she establishes relationships with a teacher/educator (Menchen, 1999; Fernández et al, 2005). 
The  practice  in  the  educational  setting  is  fundamental  for  the  supervisee.  It  is  through  supervision  that  the 
supervisor gets the opportunity to transmit professional values, knowledge and skills. Learning also occurs from the 
supervision relationship. By this process, the supervisee can experience how it is like to work in the profession as 
well to know the type of development that is needed throughout the career (Hodges, 2009). 
Like  mentioned  before,  the  supervisor  is  trustworthy  and  has  willingness  to  help  others  in  their  growth  and 
development.  By  reflecting  on  these  characteristics,  it  is  understandable  that  the  supervision  relationship  can  be 
affected according to the expectations and perceptions of both, and it can determine the success of the relationship. 
The supervisor assists the student through a transition phase, and naturally he/she provides advice and support. 
According to the learning environment and the level of competency to be achieved, the type and level of supervision 
is influenced positively or negatively. 
Clay  and  Wade  (2001)  say  that  being  a  supervisor  involves  acting  as  a  role  model,  facilitating  learning  and 
supervision that is appropriate to the student’s area of practice. Therefore, the supervisor’s personal qualities are the 
key to effective supervision (Neary, 2000; Pulsford, 2002; Hodges, 2009). 
Although supervising is regarded as a gold standard (Grave, Dolmans, & Vleuten, 1999), in Portugal there is a 
lack of knowledge on the dynamics of the supervision process in the sign language interpreters’ educational setting. 
 
Conclusion 
The  The  Portuguese  Sign  language  interpreter  acts  as  a  link  between  two  communities,  so  he  shall  have 
qualifications, ethics, and knowledge of the deaf culture and of sign language as well as performance in Portuguese 
in order to really break the communication barriers. 
According to Caires (2003) and Silva (2008), the practice setting has an impact on students' self-image and their 
professional  identity  that  is  still  being  trained,  establishing  an  opportunity  for  the  supervisee  to  discover  his/her 
potential as a professional. 
Supervising  in  the  practice  setting  is  a  way  for  students  to  be  exposed  to  work  with  learning  strategies  and 
experiences,  which  provides  them  opportunities  to  reflect  and  develop  (Marshall  &  Gordon,  2005).  So,  the 
relationship established between supervisor and supervisee needs to be based on mutual respect and partnership in 
order to be effective (Spouse, 1996). 
As explained through this article, in the supervision period, the supervisor plays many roles to enhance the global 
development of his/her supervisee. 
The meaning and emphasis of each role varies and depends on the supervisees’ level of professional and personal 
development achieved. So, it is an essential characteristic for the supervisor to be able to identify which of those 
roles are needed to be used so he/she can optimize the student’s development. 
As  a  result,  to  supervise  sign  language  interpreters  students  effectively,  the  supervisor  needs  to  have  certain 
personal, intellectual, social and technical attributes as the ones identified in the literature and in this article. 
 
However, Nascimento (1997) states that (...) the translation of knowledge into practice is not an easy process, 
because it does not involves only a technical dimension, but implies a personal work building strategies for 
action  (methods)  or  in  a  quest  for  relations  with  other  events  in  order  to  be  technical,  economic,  social  or 
political (p. 15). 
10                                             Cátia Marlene Silva Monteiro Santos / Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 29 (2011) 5 – 12 
The performance of a profession involves a scientific and intellectual activity, of a non- repetitive or mechanical 
routine  (Nunes,  2007). The  technique  is  learned  after  a  long  training  and  supervising  students  in  translation  and 
interpreting in the Portuguese sign language is an activity of altruistic nature, which results in providing a service to 
society. 
 
References 
 
Ali  PA,  W.  (2008).  Professional  development  and  the  role  of  mentorship.  Art  &  Science:  Nursing  Standard  , 
22(42), pp. 35-39. 
Andrews, M., & Chilton, F. (2000). Student and mentor perceptions of mentoring effectiveness. Nurse Education 
Today , 20, pp. 555-562. 
Andrews, M., & Roberts, D. (2003). Supporting student nurses learning in and through clinical practice: the role of 
the clinical guide. Nurse Education Today , 23, pp. 474-481. 
Aston, L., Mallik, M., Day, C., & Fraser, D. (2000). An exploration into the role of the teacher/lecturer in practice. 
Nurse Education Today , 20, pp. 178-188. 
Baillie,  L.  (1993).  Factors  affecting  students  nurse's  learning  in  community  placements:  a  phenomenological 
study. Journal of Advanced Nursing , 18 (7), pp. 1043-1053. 
Caires, S. (2003). Vivências e percepções do estágio pedagógico: a perspectiva dos estagiários da Universidade do 
Minho. Tese de Doutoramento em Psicologia . Braga: Universidade do Minho. 
Campbell,  I.,  Larrivee,  L.,  Field,  P.,  Day,  R.,  &  Reutter,  L.  (1994).  Learning  to  nurse  in  the  clinical  setting. 
Journal of Advanced Nursing , 20 (6), pp. 1125-1131. 
Clay, G., & Wade, M. (2001). Mentors or practice educators? Community Practitioner , 74, p. 6. 
Cromack,  E.  (2004).  Identidade,  cultura  surda  e  produção  de  subjectividades  e  educação:  atravessamentos  e 
implicações sociais. Psicologia: Ciência e Profissão , 24 (4), pp. 68-77. 
Darling, L. (1986). Cultivating minor mentors. Nurse Educator , 11 (4), pp. 24-25. 
Dean, R., & Pollard, R. (2001). Application of demand-control theory to sign language interpreting/implications 
for stress and interpreter training. Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf Education , 6, pp. 1-14. 
Fernandes, R., & Carvalho, J. (2005). Intérpretes de língua gestual portuguesa, da formação à prática real. In O. 
Coelho, Perscrutar a escutar a surdez (pp. 139-151). Edições Afrontamento. 
Fernandéz,  L.,  Sanz,  C.,  Santalla,  A.,  &  Sánchez,  R.  (2005).  Comunicación  orientadora  y  acción  tutorial  en 
educación. Paradigma , 26(1), pp. 117-136. 
Gallinagh, R., Campbell, L., Getty, M., Mitchell, F., & McKenna, P. (2000). Clinical supervision at work. Elderly 
Care , 20 (6), pp. 15-17. 
Grave, W., Dolmans, D., & Vleuten, C. (1999). Profiles of effective tutors in problem-based learnng: scaffolding 
student learnig. Medical Education , 33, pp. 901-906. 
Gray, M., & Smith, L. (2000). The qualities of an effective mentor from the students nurse's perspective: findings 
from a longitudinal quualitative study. Journal of Advenced Nursing , 32, pp. 556-576. 
Cátia Marlene Silva Monteiro Santos / Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 29 (2011) 5 – 12                                    11
Guarinello, A., Santana, A., Figueiredo, L., & Massi, G. (2008). O intérprete universitário da língua brasileira de 
sinais na cidade de Curitiba. Revista Brasileira de Educação Especial , 14(1), pp. 63-74. 
Henderson, A., Twentyman, M., Heel, A., & Lloyd, B. (2006). Student's preceptions of the psycho-social clinical 
learning environment: an evaluation of placement models. Nurse Education Today , 26, pp. 564-571. 
Hodges, B. (July de 2009). Factors that can influence mentorship relationships. Pediatric Nursing , 21(6), pp. 32-
35. 
Jardim, J. (2007). Programa de desenvolvimento de competências pessoais e sociais: estudo para a promoção do 
sucesso académico. Dissertação de Doutoramento . Universidade de Aveiro. 
Jardim, J., & Pereira, A. (2006). Competências pessoais e sociais: guia prático para a mudança positiva. Porto: 
Edições ASA. 
Kunich, J., & Lester, R. (1999). Leadership and the art of mentoring: tool kit for the time machine.  Journal of 
Leadership Studies , 84 (2), pp. 117-126. 
Lennox,  S.,  Skinner,  J.,  &  Foureur,  M.  (2008).  Mentorship,  preceptorship  and  clinical  supervision:  three  key 
process for supporting midwives. New Zealand College of Midwives Journal , Outubro, pp. 7-12. 
Levett-Jones,  T.,  Fahy,  K.,  Parsons,  K.,  &  Mitchell,  A.  (2006).  Enhancing  nursing  student´s  clinical  placement 
experiences: a quality improvment project. Contemporany Nurse , 23, pp. 58-71. 
Madureira, I., & Leite, T. (2003). Necessidades educativas especiais. Lisboa: Universidade Aberta. 
Marshall, M., & Gordon, F. (2005). Interprofessional mentorship: taking on the challenge.  Journal of Integrated 
Care , 13(2), pp. 38-43. 
Menchen Bellón, F. (1999). El tutor, dimensión histórica, social y educativa. Madrid: CCS. 
Moreno,  M.  (2005).  El  proyeto  professional:  una  estrategia  de  orientacion  en  la  universidad.  In  M.  Taveira, 
Psicologia escolar: uma proposta cientifica e pedagógica. Coimbra: Quarteto. 
Morse, J. (2006). Deconstructing the mantra of mentorship: in conversation with Phyllis Noerager Stern. Health 
Care for Women International , 27(6), pp. 548-558. 
Morton-Cooper, A., & Palmer, A. (2000). Mentoring, preceptorship and clinical supervision. Oxford: Blackwell. 
Myall,  M.,  Levett-Jones,  T.,  &  Lathlean,  J.  (2008).  Mentorship  in  contemporany  practice:  the  experience  of 
nursing students and practice mentors. Journal of Clinical Nursing , 17(14), pp. 1834-1842. 
Nascimento, C. (1997). Gestão educacional e formação de professor. Tese de Doutoramento . Campinas, Brasil: 
Departamento de Administração e Supervisão Educacional - UNICAMP. 
Neary, M. (2000). Supporting student's learning and professional development through the process of continuous 
assessement and mentorship. Nurse Education Today , 20, pp. 463-474. 
Nunes,  A.  (2007).  Supervisão,  reflexão  e  investigação-acção:  apontamentos  e  ensaios  de  desenvolvimento 
profissional. Tese de Doutoramento . Universidade de Aveiro. 
Ordem dos  Enfermeiros (2003).  Conselho de enfermagem. Do caminho percorrido e das propostas (analise do 
primeiro mandato - 1999/2003). Ordem dos Enfermeiros. 
12                                             Cátia Marlene Silva Monteiro Santos / Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 29 (2011) 5 – 12 
Pellat, G. (2006). The role of mentors in supporting pre-registration nursing students. British Journal of Nursing , 
15 (6), pp. 336-340. 
Perrenoud, P. (1999). Construir as competências desde a escola. Porto Alegre: Artmed. 
Perrenoud, P. (1993). Práticas pedagógicas, profissão docente e formação: perspectivas sociológicas. Lisboa: D. 
Quixote. 
Phillips, R., Davies, W., & Neary, M. (1996). The practitioner-teacher: a study in the introduction of mentors in 
the pre registration nurse education programme in Wales: part 2.  Journal of Advanced Nursing , 23 (6), pp. 
1080 - 1088. 
Pollard, A., & Triggs, P. (1997). Reflective teaching in secondary education: a handbook for schools ans colleges. 
Herdon: Cassel. 
Pulsford, D., & Owen, S. (2002). Are mentors ready to make difference? a survey of mentor's attitudes towards 
nurse education. Nurse Education Today , 22 (6), pp. 40-44. 
Santos, M., & Brandão, M. (2008). A supervisão pedagógica numa articulação entre a prepapração de educador, a 
formação do aluno e a qualidade da educação das crianças - a função da escala de empenhamento do adulto na 
concretização deste processo. Cadernos de Estudo , 7, pp. 79 - 105. 
Silva, A. (2008). A construção de carreira no ensino superior. Tese de Doutoramento em Psicologia . Universidade 
do Minho. 
Spouse,  J.  (2001).  Briding  theory  and  practice  in  the  supervisory  relationship:  a  social-cultural  perspective. 
Journal of Advanced Nursing , 33, pp. 144-154. 
Valente,   G.,   &   Viana,   L.   (2009).   Da   formação   por   competências   à   prática   docente   reflexiva.   Revista 
Iberoamericana de Educación , 48(4). 
Vance, C. (2000). Discovering the riches in mentor connections. Reflections on Nursing Leadership , 26 (3), pp. 
24-25. 
Wright,  C.  (1990).  An  innovation  in  a  diploma  program:  the  future  potential  of  mentorship  in  nursing.  Nurse 
Education Today , 10 (5), pp. 355-359. 
Yonge, O., Billay, D., Myrirck, F., & Luhanga, F. (2007). Preceptorship and mentorship: not a merely a matter of 
semantics. International Journal of Nursing Education Scholarship , 4(1), pp. 1-13. 
Young,  R.,  &  Friesen,  J.  (1990).  Parental  influences  on  career  development.  In  R.  Young,  &  W.  Bogen, 
Methodological approaches to the study of career. Nova Iorque: Praeger. 
 
